# System V IPC for Python - Semaphores, Shared Memory and Message Queues

This describes the `sysv_ipc` module which gives Python access to System V inter-process semaphores, shared memory and message queues on most (all?) Unix/Linux flavors. Examples include Mac, Linux, FreeBSD, OpenSolaris, HPUX, and AIX. It might also work under Windows with the [Windows Subsystem for Linux](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windows_Subsystem_for_Linux) or a library like [Cygwin](http://www.cygwin.com/).

It works with Python 3. It's released under [a BSD license](LICENSE).

The goal of this module is to allow Python to interact with non-Python apps via IPC. If you want IPC between Python apps, you're better off using the [`multiprocessing` module](https://docs.python.org/3/library/multiprocessing.html) or the [`multiprocessing.shared_memory module`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/multiprocessing.shared_memory.html) from Python's standard library.

The [source code for `sysv_ipc` is on GitHub](https://github.com/osvenskan/sysv_ipc/), along with [some sample code](#sample-code) and documentation, including [all of the changes in this version](history.md), and more.

Please use [the mailing list](https://groups.io/g/python-sysv-ipc) for questions, comments, and discussion.

You might be interested in the very similar module [`posix_ipc`](https://github.com/osvenskan/posix_ipc) which provides Python access to POSIX IPC primitives. POSIX IPC is a little easier to use than SysV IPC, but not all operating systems support it completely.

## Module `sysv_ipc`

Jump to [semaphores](#the-semaphore-class), [shared memory](#the-sharedmemory-class), or [message queues](#the-messagequeue-class).

### Module Functions

#### `attach(id, [address = None, [flags = 0]])`

Attaches the (existing) shared memory that has the given `id` and returns a new `SharedMemory` object. See [`SharedMemory.attach()`](#attachaddress--none-flags--0) for details on the `address` and `flags` parameters.

This method is useful only under fairly unusual circumstances. You probably don't need it.
    
#### `ftok(path, id, [silence_warning = False])`

Calls `ftok(path, id)`. Note that [`ftok()` has limitations](#the-weakness-of-ftok), and this function will issue a warning to that effect unless `silence_warning` is True.

#### `remove_semaphore(id)`

Removes the semaphore with the given `id`.

#### `remove_shared_memory(id)`

Removes the shared memory with the given `id`.

#### `remove_message_queue(id)`

Removes the message queue with the given `id`.

### Module Constants

#### `IPC_CREAT, IPC_EXCL and IPC_CREX`

`IPC_CREAT` and `IPC_EXCL` are flags used when creating IPC objects. They're bitwise unique and can be ORed together. `IPC_CREX` is shorthand for `IPC_CREAT | IPC_EXCL`.

When passed to an IPC object's constructor, `IPC_CREAT` indicates that you want to create a new object or open an existing one. If you want the call to fail if an object with that key already exists, specify the `IPC_EXCL` flag, too.

#### `IPC_PRIVATE`

This is a special value that can be passed in place of a key. It implies that the IPC object should be available only to the creating process or its child processes (e.g. those created with `fork()`).

#### `KEY_MIN and KEY_MAX`

These values denote the range of keys that this module accepts. Your OS might limit keys to a smaller range depending on the typedef of `key_t`.

Keys randomly generated by this module are in the range `1 ≤ key ≤ SHRT_MAX`. That's type-safe unless your OS has a very bizarre definition of `key_t`.

#### `SEMAPHORE_VALUE_MAX`

The maximum value of a semaphore.

#### `PAGE_SIZE`

The operating system's memory page size, in bytes. It's probably a good idea to make shared memory segments some multiple of this size.

#### `SEMAPHORE_TIMEOUT_SUPPORTED`

True if the platform supports timed semaphore waits, False otherwise.

#### `SHM_RDONLY`

Pass this flag to `SharedMemory.attach()` to attach the segment read-only.

#### `SHM_RND`

You probably don't need this, but it can be used when attaching shared memory to force the address to be rounded down to `SHMLBA`. See your system's man page for `shmat()`for more information.

#### `SHM_HUGETLB, SHM_NORESERVE and SHM_REMAP`

You probably don't need these. They're Linux-specific flags that can be passed to the `SharedMemory` constructor, or to the `.attach()` function in the case of `SHM_REMAP`. See your system's man page for `shmget()` and `shmat()` for more information.

### Module Errors

In addition to standard Python errors (e.g. `ValueError`), this module raises custom errors. These errors cover situations specific to IPC.

#### `Error`

The base error class for all the custom errors in this module. This error is occasionally raised on its own but you'll almost always see a more specific error.

#### `InternalError`

Indicates that something has gone very wrong in the module code. Please report this to the maintainer.

#### `PermissionsError`

Indicates that you've attempted something that the permissions on the IPC object don't allow.

#### `ExistentialError`

Indicates an error related to the existence or non-existence of an IPC object.

#### `BusyError`

Raised when a semaphore call to `.P()` (`acquire()`) or `.Z()` either times out or would be forced to wait when its `block` attribute is False.

#### `NotAttachedError`

Raised when a process attempts to read from or write to a shared memory segment to which it is not attached.

## The Semaphore Class

This is a handle to a semaphore.

### Constructor

#### `Semaphore(key, [flags = 0, [mode = 0600, [initial_value = 0]]])`

Creates a new semaphore or opens an existing one. `key` must be `None`, `IPC_PRIVATE` or an integer > `KEY_MIN` and ≤ `KEY_MAX`. If the key is `None`, the module chooses a random unused key.

The `flags` specify whether you want to create a new semaphore or open an existing one.

 - With `flags` set to the **default** of `0`, the module attempts to **open an existing** semaphore identified by `key` and raises a `ExistentialError` if that semaphore doesn't exist.
 - With `flags` set to `IPC_CREAT`, the module **opens** the semaphore identified by `key` **or creates** a new one if no such semaphore exists. Using `IPC_CREAT` by itself is not recommended. (See [Semaphore Initialization](#semaphore-initialization).)
 - With `flags` set to `IPC_CREX` (`IPC_CREAT | IPC_EXCL`), the module **creates a new semaphore** identified by `key`. If a semaphore with that key already exists, the call raises `ExistentialError`. **The `initial_value` is ignored unless both of these flags are specified** or if the semaphore is read-only.

When opening an existing semaphore, `mode` is ignored.

### Methods

#### `acquire([timeout = None, [delta = 1]])`

Waits (conditionally) until the semaphore's value is > 0 and then returns, decrementing the semaphore.

The `timeout` (which can be a float) specifies how many seconds this call should wait, if at all.

 - A `timeout` of None (the default) implies no time limit. The call will not return until its wait condition is satisfied.
 - When `timeout` is 0, the call raises a `BusyError` if it can't immediately acquire the semaphore. Since it will return immediately if *not* asked to wait, this can be thought of as "non-blocking" mode.
 - When the `timeout` is > 0, the call will wait no longer than `timeout` seconds before either returning (having acquired the semaphore) or raising a `BusyError`.

When the call returns, the semaphore's value decreases by `abs(delta)` which defaults to 1.

On platforms that don't support the `semtimedop()` API call, all timeouts (including zero) are treated as infinite. The call will not return until its wait condition is satisfied.

Most platforms provide `semtimedop()`. Mac is a notable exception. The module's Boolean constant `SEMAPHORE_TIMEOUT_SUPPORTED` is True on platforms that support `semtimedop()`.

#### `release([delta = 1])`

Releases (increments) the semaphore.

The semaphore's value increases by `abs(delta)` which defaults to 1.

#### `P()`

A synonym for `.acquire()` that takes the same parameters.

"P" stands for *prolaag* or *probeer te verlagen*  (try to decrease), the name given by [Edsger Dijkstra](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semaphore_(programming)).

#### `V()`

A synonym for `.release()` that takes the same parameters.

"V" stands for *vrijgave* (release), the name given by [Edsger Dijkstra](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semaphore_(programming)).

#### `Z([timeout = None])`

Blocks until zee zemaphore is zero.

`Timeout` has the same meaning as described in `.acquire()`.

#### `remove()`

Removes (deletes) the semaphore from the system.

As far as I can tell, the effect of deleting a semaphore that other processes are still using is OS-dependent. Check your system's man pages for `semctl(IPC_RMID)`.

### Attributes

#### `key (read-only)`

The key passed in the call to the constructor.

#### `id (read-only)`

The id assigned to this semaphore by the OS.

#### `value`

The integer value of the semaphore.

#### `undo`

Defaults to False.

When True, operations that change the semaphore's value will be undone (reversed) when the process exits. Note that when a process exits, an undo operation may imply that a semaphore's value should become negative or exceed its maximum. Behavior in this case is system-dependent, which means that **using this flag can make your code non-portable**.

#### `block`

Defaults to True, which means that calls to `acquire()` and `release()` will not return until their wait conditions are satisfied.

When False, these calls will not block but will instead raise an error if they are unable to return immediately.

#### `mode`

The semaphore's permission bits. The following Python code will display the mode in octal:

```python
print(int(str(my_sem.mode), 8))
```

#### `uid`

The semaphore's user id.

#### `gid`

The semaphore's group id.

#### `cuid (read-only)`

The semaphore creator's user id.

#### `cgid (read-only)`

The semaphore creator's group id.

#### `last_pid (read-only)`

The PID of the process that last called `semop()` (`.P()`, `.V()` or `.Z()`) on this semaphore.

Under some systems (e.g. Linux and Mac OS, but not FreeBSD), [other changes to the semaphore can also set `last_pid`](#last_pid-behavior-depends-on-platform).

#### `waiting_for_nonzero (read-only)`

The number of processes waiting for the value of the semaphore to become non-zero (i.e. the number waiting in a call to `.P()`).

#### `waiting_for_zero (read-only)`

The number of processes waiting for the value of the semaphore to become zero (i.e. the number waiting in a call to `.Z()`).

#### `o_time (read-only)`

The last time `semop()` (i.e. `.P()`, `.V()` or `.Z()`) was called on this semaphore.

### Context Manager Support

These semaphores provide `__enter__()` and `__exit__()` methods so they can be used in context managers. For instance --

```python
with sysv_ipc.Semaphore(name) as sem:
    # Do something...
```

Entering the context acquires the semaphore, exiting the context releases the semaphore. See `demo4/child.py` for a complete example.

## The SharedMemory Class

This is a handle to a shared memory segment. 

### Buffer Protocol Support

In addition to the methods and attributes described below, `SharedMemory` supports Python's buffer protocol, which means you can create `bytearray` and `memoryview` objects based on a `SharedMemory` segment. See `demos/buffer_protocol` for an example.

### Constructor

`SharedMemory(key, [flags = 0, [mode = 0600, [size = 0 or PAGE_SIZE, [init_character = ' ']]]])`

Creates a new shared memory segment or opens an existing one. The memory is automatically attached.

`key` must be `None`, `IPC_PRIVATE` or an integer > `0` and ≤ `KEY_MAX`. If the key is `None`, the module chooses a random unused key.

The `flags` specify whether you want to create a new shared memory segment or open an existing one.

 - With `flags` set to the **default** of `0`, the module attempts to **open an existing** shared memory segment identified by `key` and raises `ExistentialError` if it doesn't exist.
 - With `flags` set to **`IPC_CREAT`**, the module **opens** the shared memory segment identified by `key` **or creates** a new one if no such segment exists. Using `IPC_CREAT` by itself is not recommended. (See [Shared Memory Initialization](#shared-memory-initialization).)
 - With `flags` set to **`IPC_CREX`** (`IPC_CREAT | IPC_EXCL`), the module **creates** a new shared memory segment identified by `key`. If a segment with that key already exists, the call raises `ExistentialError`.
 When both `IPC_CREX` is specified and the caller has write permission, each byte in the new memory segment will be initialized to the value of `init_character`.

The significance of `size` depends on whether one is opening an existing segment or creating a new one.

When opening an existing segment, `size` must be ≤ the existing segment's size. Zero is always valid.

When creating an new segment, many (most? all?) operating systems insist on a `size > 0`. In addition, some round the size up to the next multiple of `PAGE_SIZE`.

This module supplies a default `size` of `PAGE_SIZE` when `IPC_CREX` is specified and `0` otherwise.

### Methods

#### `attach([address = None, [flags = 0]])`

Attaches this process to the shared memory. The memory must be attached before calling `.read()` or `.write()`. Note that the constructor automatically attaches the memory so you won't need to call this method unless you explicitly detach it and then want to use it again.

The address parameter allows one to specify (as a Python int) a memory address at which to attach the segment. Passing None (the default) is equivalent to passing NULL to `shmat()`. See that function's man page for details.

The flags are mostly only relevant if one specifies a specific address. One exception is the flag `SHM_RDONLY` which, surprisingly, attaches the segment read-only.

Note that on some (and perhaps all) platforms, each call to `.attach()` increments the system's "attached" count. Thus, if each call to `.attach()` isn't paired with a call to `.detach()`, the system's "attached" count for the shared memory segment will not go to zero when the process exits. As a result, the shared memory segment may not disappear even when its creator calls `.remove()` and exits.

#### `detach()`

Detaches this process from the shared memory.

#### `read([byte_count = 0, [offset = 0]])`

Reads up to `byte_count` bytes from the shared memory segment starting at `offset` and returns them as a bytes object.

If `byte_count` is zero (the default) the entire buffer is returned.

This method will never attempt to read past the end of the shared memory segment, even when
`offset + byte_count` exceeds the memory segment's size. In that case, the bytes from `offset` to the end of the segment are returned.

#### `write(some_bytes, [offset = 0])`

Writes bytes to the shared memory, starting at `offset`. Passing a `str` object may work, but doing so is unsupported and may be explicitly deprecated in a future version.

If the offset + data would write outside of the segment, this function raises `ValueError`.

The bytes may contain embedded NULL bytes (`'\0'`).

#### `remove()`

Removes (destroys) the shared memory. Note that the operating system will postpone actual destruction until all processes have detached.

### Attributes

#### `key (read-only)`

The key provided in the constructor.

#### `id (read-only)`

The id assigned to this segment by the OS.

#### `size (read-only)`

The size of the segment in bytes.

#### `address (read-only)`

The address of the segment as Python int.

#### `attached (read-only)`

If True, this segment is currently attached.

#### `last_attach_time (read-only)`

The last time a process attached this segment.

#### `last_detach_time (read-only)`

The last time a process detached this segment.

#### `last_change_time (read-only)`

The last time a process changed the uid, gid or mode on this segment.

#### `creator_pid (read-only)`

The PID of the process that created this segment.

#### `last_pid (read-only)`

The PID of the most last process to attach or detach this segment.

#### `number_attached (read-only)`

The number of processes attached to this segment.

#### `uid`

The segment's user id.

#### `gid`

The segment's group id.

#### `mode`

The shared memory's permission bits. The following Python code will display the mode in octal:

```python
print(int(str(my_mem.mode), 8))
```

#### `cuid (read-only)`

The segment creator's user id.

#### `cgid (read-only)`

The segment creator's group id.

## The MessageQueue Class

This is a handle to a FIFO message queue.

### Constructor

#### `MessageQueue(key, [flags = 0, [mode = 0600, [max_message_size = 2048]]])`

Creates a new message queue or opens an existing one.

`key` must be `None`, `IPC_PRIVATE` oran integer > `0` and ≤ `KEY_MAX`. If the key is `None`, the module chooses a random unused key.

The `flags` specify whether you want to create a new queue or open an existing one.

 - With `flags` set to the **default** of `0`, the module attempts to **open an existing** message queue identified by `key` and raises `ExistentialError` if it doesn't exist.
 - With `flags` set to **`IPC_CREAT`**, the module **opens** the message queue identified by `key`**or creates** a new one if no such queue exists.
 - With `flags` set to **`IPC_CREX`** (`IPC_CREAT | IPC_EXCL`), the module **creates** a new message queue identified by `key`. If a queue with that key already exists, the call raises `ExistentialError`.

The `max_message_size` can be increased from the default, but be aware of the issues discussed in [Message Queue Limits](#message-queue-limits).

### Methods

#### `send(message, [block = True, [type = 1]])`

Puts a message on the queue.

The `message` should be a bytes object and can contain embedded NULLs (ASCII `0x00`). Passing a Unicode object may work, but doing so is unsupported and may be explicitly deprecated in a future version.

The `block` flag specifies whether or not the call should wait if the message can't be sent (if, for example, the queue is full). When `block` is `False`, the call will raise `BusyError` if the message can't be sent immediately.

The `type` is associated with the message and is relevant when calling `receive()`. It must be > 0.

#### `receive([block = True, [type = 0]])`

Receives a message from the queue, returning a tuple of `(message, type)`. The message is a bytes object.

The `block` flag specifies whether or not the call should wait if there's no messages of the specified type to retrieve. When `block` is `False`, the call will raise `BusyError` if a message can't be received immediately.

The `type` permits some control over which messages are retrieved.

 - When `type == 0`, the call returns the first message on the queue regardless of its type.
 - When `type > 0`, the call returns the first message of that type.
 - When `type < 0`, the call returns the first message of the lowest type that is ≤ the absolute value of `type`.

#### `remove()`

Removes (deletes) the message queue.

### Attributes

#### `key (read-only)`

The key provided in the constructor.

#### `id (read-only)`

The id assigned to this queue by the OS.

#### `max_size`

The maximum size of the queue in bytes. Only a process with "appropriate privileges" can increase this value, and on some systems even that won't work. See [Message Queue Limits](#message-queue-limits) for details.

#### `last_send_time (read-only)`

The last time a message was placed on the queue.

#### `last_receive_time (read-only)`

The last time a message was received from the queue.

#### `last_change_time (read-only)`

The last time a process changed the queue's attributes.

#### `last_send_pid (read-only)`

The id of the most recent process to send a message.

#### `last_receive_pid (read-only)`

The id of the most recent process to receive a message.

#### `current_messages (read-only)`

The number of messages currently in the queue.

#### `uid`

The queue's user id.

#### `gid`

The queue's group id.

#### `mode`

The queue's permission bits. The following Python code will display the mode in octal:

```python
print(int(str(my_queue.mode), 8))
```

#### `cuid (read-only)`

The queue creator's user id.

#### `cgid (read-only)`

The queue creator's group id.

### Usage Tips

#### Sample Code

This module comes with four sets of demonstration code in the directory [`demos`](https://github.com/osvenskan/sysv_ipc/tree/master/demos).

 - `sem_and_shm` demonstrates using semaphores and shared memory to share data between processes.
 - `message_queues` demonstrates using message queues to share data between processes.
 -  `buffer_protocol` demonstrates creating `bytearray` and `memoryview` objects atop shared memory.
 - `semaphore_context_manager` demonstrates using semaphore instances in a context manager (`with` statement).

#### The Weakness of `ftok()`

Most System V IPC sample code recommends `ftok()` for generating an integer key that's more-or-less random. It does not, however, guarantee that the key it generates is unused. If `ftok()` gives your application a key that some other application is already using, your app is in trouble unless it has a reliable second mechanism for generating a key. And if that's the case, why not just abandon `ftok()` and use the second mechanism exclusively?

This is the weakness of `ftok()` -- it isn't guaranteed to give you what you want. The [BSD man page for `ftok`](http://www.unix.com/man-page/FreeBSD/3/ftok/) says it is "quite possible for the routine to return duplicate keys". The term "quite possible" isn't quantified, but suppose it means one-tenth of one percent. Who wants to have 1-in-1000 odds of a catastrophic failure in their program, or even 1-in-10000?

This module obviates the need for `ftok()` by generating random keys for you. If your application can't use `sysv_ipc`'s automatically generated keys because it needs to know the key in advance, hardcoding a random number like 123456 in your app might be no worse than using `ftok()` and has the advantage of not hiding its limitations.

This module provides `ftok()` in case you want to experiment with it. However, to emphasize its weakness, this version of `ftok()` raises a warning with every call unless you explicitly pass a flag to silence it.

This package also provides `ftok_experiment.py` so that you can observe how often `ftok()` generates duplicate keys on your system.

#### `last_pid` Behavior Depends on Platform

While testing `sysv_ipc` in 2016, I found that some operating systems OS behaved differently than the UNIX specification with regard to a very specific point. According to the specification, only an operation (`P()`, `V()`, or `Z()`) should set `sempid` (which in `sysv_ipc` is the attribute `Semaphore.last_pid`). However, under Linux and Mac OS (and possibly other systems including Open Solaris), a few other things (like setting the semaphore's value) also change `sempid` (`last_pid`). FreeBSD's behavior agrees with the specification.

I filed a bug against the Linux kernel (https://bugzilla.kernel.org/show_bug.cgi?id=112271). The kernel maintainers declined to change the code (although they did change the documentation).

IMO it's not useful to argue who is right and wrong here; that ship has sailed. The practical upshot is that the behavior of `last_pid` is not as cross-platform as it could be.

#### Semaphore Initialization

When a System V sempahore is created at the C API level, the OS is not required to initialize the semaphore's value. (This per [the
SUSv3 standard for `semget()`](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9799919799/functions/semget.html).) Some (most? all?) operating systems initialize it to zero, but this behavior is non-standard and therefore can't be relied upon for cross-platform applications.

If sempahore creation happens in a predictable, orderly fashion, this isn't a problem. But a race condition arises when multiple processes vie to create/open the same semaphore. When an application calls `semget()` with only the `IPC_CREAT` flag, the caller can't tell whether or not they have created a new semaphore or opened an existing one. **This makes it difficult to create reliable code without using `IPC_EXCL`.** W. Richard Stevens' *Unix Network Programming Volume 2* calls this "a fatal flaw in the design of System V semaphores" (p 284).

For instance, imagine processes P1 and P2. They're executing the same code, and that code intends to share a binary semaphore. Consider the following sequence of events at the startup of P1 and P2 —

 1. P1 calls `semget(IPC_CREAT)` to create the semaphore S.
 2. P2 calls `semget(IPC_CREAT)` to open S.
 3. P1 initializes the semaphore's value to 1.
 4. P1 calls `acquire()`, decrementing the value to 0.
 5. P2, assuming S is a newly-created semaphore that needs to be initialized, incorrectly sets the semaphore's value to 1.
 6. P2 calls `acquire()`, decrementing the value to 0. Both processes now think they own the lock.

W. Richard Stevens' solution for this race condition is to check the value of `sem_otime` (an element in the `semid_ds` struct that's populated on the call to `semctl(IPC_STAT)` and which is exposed to Python by this module) which is initialized to zero when the semaphore is created and otherwise holds the time of the last call to `semop()` (which is called by `P()`/`acquire()`, `V()`/`release()`, and `Z()`).

In Python, each process would run something like this —

```python
try:
    sem = sysv_ipc.Semaphore(42, sysv_ipc.IPC_CREX)
except sysv_ipc.ExistentialError:
    # One of my peers created the semaphore already
    sem = sysv_ipc.Semaphore(42)
    # Wait for that peer to do the first acquire or release
    while not sem.o_time:
        time.sleep(.1)
else:
    # Initialize sem.o_time to nonzero value
    sem.release()
# Now the semaphore is safe to use.
```

#### Shared Memory Initialization

With shared memory, using the `IPC_CREAT` flag without `IPC_EXCL` is problematic *unless you know the size of the segment you're potentially opening*.

Why? Because when creating a new segment, many (most? all?) operating systems demand a non-zero size. However, when opening an existing segment, zero is the only guaranteed safe value (again, assuming one doesn't know the size of the segment in advance). Since `IPC_CREAT` can open or create a segment, there's no safe value for the size under this circumstance.

As a (sort of) side note, the [SUSv3 specification for `shmget()`](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9799919799/functions/shmget.html) says only that the size of a new segment must not be less than "the system-imposed minimum". I gather that at one time, some systems set the minimum at zero despite the fact that it doesn't make much sense to create a zero-length shared memory segment. I think most modern systems do the sensible thing and insist on a minimum length of 1.

#### Message Queue Limits

Python programmers can usually remain blissfully ignorant of memory allocation issues. Unfortunately, a combination of factors makes them relevant when dealing with System V message queues. [**Update 2026**: I wrote these notes 17 years ago, so the operating systems they reference are out of date, and their newer versions might behave very differently. I leave the notes here as a demonstration of the system-specific limits one should be aware of.]

**Some implementations impose extremely stingy limits.** For instance, many BSDish systems (including Mac) limit queues to 2048 bytes. Note that that's the *total queue size*, not the message size. Two 1k messages would fill the queue.

**Those limits can be very difficult to change.** At best, only privileged processes can increase the limit. At worst, the limit is a kernel parameter and requires a kernel change via a tunable or a recompile.

**This module can't figure out what the limits are**, so it can't cushion them or even report them to you. On some systems the limits are expressed in header files, on others they're available through kernel interfaces (like FreeBSD's `sysctl`). Under macOS and to some extent OpenSolaris, I can't figure out where they're defined, and what I report here is the result of experimentation and educated guesses formed by searching the Internet.

The good news is that this module will still behave as advertised no matter what these limits are. Nevertheless you might be surprised when a call to `.send()` get stuck because a queue is full even though you've only put 2048 bytes of messages in it.

When I wrote the message queue code in 2009, here were the limits I was able to find under my test operating systems, ordered from best (most generous) to worst (most stingy). Obviously this information is quite old now but I present it here in case it's still relevant.

Under **OpenSolaris 2008.05** each queue's maximum size defaults to 64k. A privileged process (e.g. root) can change this through the `max_size` attribute of a `sysv_ipc.MessageQueue` object. I was able to increase it to 16M and successfully sent sixteen 1M messages to the queue.

Under **Ubuntu 8.04** (and perhaps other Linuxes) each queue's maximum size defaults to 16k. As with OpenSolaris, I was able to increase this to 16M, but only for a privileged process.

Under **FreeBSD 7** and I think NetBSD and OpenBSD, each queue's maximum size defaults to 2048 bytes. Furthermore, one can (as root) set `max_size` to something larger and FreeBSD doesn't complain, but it also ignores the change.

**macOS** is the worst of the lot. Each queue is limited to 2048 bytes and macOS silently ignores attempts to increase this (just like FreeBSD). To add insult to injury, there appears to be no way to increase this limit short of recompiling the kernel.

If you want to search for these limits on your operating system, the key constants are `MSGSEG`, `MSGSSZ`, `MSGTQL`, `MSGMNB`, `MSGMNI` and `MSGMAX`. Under BSD, `sysctl kern.ipc` should tell you what you need to know and may allow you to change these parameters.

#### Nobody Likes a Mr. Messy

Semaphores and especially shared memory are a little different from most Python objects and therefore require a little more care on the part of the programmer. When a program creates a semaphore or shared memory object, it creates something that resides *outside of its own process*, just like a file on a hard drive. It won't go away when your process ends unless you explicitly remove it.

In short, remember to clean up after yourself.

#### Consult Your Local `man` Pages

The `sysv_ipc` module is just a wrapper around your system's API. If your system's implementation has quirks, the `man` pages for `semget, semctl, semop shmget, shmat, shmdt` and `shmctl` will probably cover them.

#### Interesting Tools

Many systems come with `ipcs` and `ipcrm`. The former shows existing shared memory, semaphores and message queues on your system and the latter allows you to remove them.

### Last But Not Least

For Pythonistas, [a meditation on the inaccuracy of shared memories](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xe1a1wHxTyo).

#### Support for Older Pythons

[Version 1.0.1 of `sysv_ipc`](https://pypi.org/project/sysv-ipc/1.0.1/) was the last to support both Python 2.7 and Python 3.x. No changes (neither fixes nor features) will be backported to 1.0.1.

If you need to support Python < 2.7 (🙀), try [sysv_ipc version 0.6.8](https://pypi.org/project/sysv-ipc/0.6.8/).

#### Known Bugs

Bugs? My code never has bugs! There are, however, some suboptimal anomalies...

One such anomaly is that this module can't report the exact min and max values for a key. It turns out that [it's really difficult to determine the maximum value that a typedef-ed variable can hold](http://groups.google.com/group/comp.lang.c/browse_thread/thread/14a1cdbfb111f4eb).

Other ~~bugs~~ suboptimal anomalies are recorded in [the issue tracker on GitHub](https://github.com/osvenskan/sysv_ipc/issues).
